{
        "_index": "wikipedia",
        "_id": "12553",
        "_score": 1,
        "_ignored": [
          "text.keyword"
        ],
        "_source": {
          "title": "Glorantha",
          "text": """1: Fantasy world created by Greg Stafford
date: August 2019
date: October 2024
name: Glorantha
image: Glorantha.png
imagesize: 250px
caption: Map of Glorantha by Christophe Dang Ngoc Chan
source: RuneQuest and HeroQuest
creator: Greg Stafford
genre: Tabletop role-playing game, wargame, fiction, Video games
type: Fantasy world
locations: Genertela, Pamaltela
people:

Glorantha is a fantasy world created by Greg Stafford.

Overview
It was first introduced in the board game White Bear and Red Moon (1975) by Chaosium and then in a number of other board, roleplaying and computer games, including RuneQuest and HeroQuest, as well as several works of fiction and the computer strategy game King of Dragon Pass.  The Gloranthan world is characterised by its complex use of mythology, heavily influenced by the universalist approaches of Joseph Campbell and Mircea Eliade, its sword and sorcery ethos, its long and distinctive history as a setting for role-playing games, its community development and expansion, and its relative lack of Tolkienesque influence, which is uncommon among early American fantasy role-playing games.

Stafford first wrote about in Glorantha in 1966 as a way to deepen his own understanding of mythology. He founded the company Chaosium to publish the board wargame White Bear and Red Moon in 1975, which was set in Glorantha. Chaosium later published other games in the setting, including the critically acclaimed RuneQuest. Various later editions of RuneQuest, the narrative role-playing game HeroQuest (the first edition of which was published as Hero Wars), and the video game King of Dragon Pass were also set in Glorantha, as were several prominent fan efforts. Stafford has also explored the Gloranthan setting in the fantasy novel King of Sartar and a number of unfinished works published under the collective name of "the Stafford Library".

In Glorantha, magic operates from the everyday level of prayers and charms to the creation and maintenance of the world. Heroes make their way in the world, and may also venture into metaphysical realms to gain knowledge and power, at the risk of body and soul. In the more recent material, competing magical outlooks (such as theism, shamanism and mysticism) exist to explain the world. Within each metaphysical system, adherents may also compete, such as when theistic worshipers of rival gods battle each other. The world is flat, with a dome-like sky, and it has been shaped in large and small ways by the mythic actions of the gods. The 'historical' world of Glorantha is in a more or less fallen state, having recovered only partially from a universal battle against Chaos in the mythic Godtime.

Humans are the dominant race, but other sentient beings abound. Some, such as the mystic dragonewts, are unique to Glorantha. Familiar nonhuman races, such as elves and dwarves, are distinct from their common, Tolkienesque portrayals.

History of the Gloranthan game world
Early development (1960s–1970s)
Glorantha's origins lie in experiments with mythology, storytelling, recreation, and the blending of ancient societies.  It is unlike its contemporary, Dungeons & Dragons which has its roots in wargaming.

Stafford's first imaginings of Glorantha date back to 1966, when he began his studies at Beloit College, as a vehicle for him to deepen his own understanding of mythology by creating his own mythology. Stafford was greatly influenced by the ideas on the mythology of Joseph Campbell, and echoes of Campbell's work are to be found in many aspects of Glorantha; for instance, the story of the "God Learners" can be seen as an exercise on the implications of Campbell's idea of a unifying monomyth, and the story of Prince Argrath an exploration of Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949).  More abstractly, Campbell's idea that myths are how we shape our lives deeply informs the picture of life in Glorantha throughout the game world's publication history.

The first game set in Glorantha was the board game White Bear and Red Moon. The game details a time of constant war between the land of Sartar and the Lunar Empire during the reign of Argrath Dragontooth. Its board details an area called Dragon Pass, while the rulebook provides details of the warring factions, their lands, and leaders. In addition, it provides a large-scale map titled the Greater Lunar Empire, showing a larger world in which Dragon Pass is placed. The White Bear and Red Moon does not disclose the name of the world.

Nomad Gods, a second board game, published by Chaosium in 1978, and based on the raids and wars between the beast-riding, spirit-worshiping tribes of Prax, a cursed land located east of Dragon Pass. It also did not mention the world by name.

In 1978, after the publication of Nomad Gods, and prior to the publication of RuneQuest, the name Glorantha appeared in print for the first time. Wyrm's Footnotes #4 contained three articles on Glorantha and a map of the world itself.

In role-playing games (late 1970s – 1990s)
The first edition of the role-playing game RuneQuest was released in 1978. Here, the world was referred to as "Glorontha". Several later editions were made; the second edition ("RuneQuest 2") in 1979 introduced many sophisticated game aids, such as Cults of Prax and Cults of Terror, and polished campaign packs such as Griffin Mountain. Using materials such as Cults of Prax, players aligned their characters with any of a number of religions, grounding those characters in the political, cultural, and metaphysical conflicts of the setting. Each religion offered a distinct worldview and cultural outlook, none of which considered objectively correct out-of-character. This approach of offering competing mythical histories and value systems continues in current Glorantha material. Cults of Terror focused on the worship of evil gods and adversaries, such as Vivamort, a vampire cult, and Lunar and Chaos cults.

In 1993, Stafford published his first major expansion of Gloranthan mythology, the novel King of Sartar. This was a departure from previous Gloranthan material, which had all been targeted at a tabletop role-playing game audience.

In an attempt to leverage the power of a much bigger gaming company, a third edition of RuneQuest, was published with Avalon Hill in 1984. The default setting for this edition was given as the "Dark Ages of fantasy Europe", but it also included a booklet allowing use in Glorantha. Later supplements such as Gods of Glorantha expanded religious aspects, while Glorantha: Genertela, Crucible of the Hero Wars did the same for culture and geography.

In the mid-1990s, Avalon Hill began work on a fourth edition of RuneQuest, subtitled Adventures in Glorantha. Stafford did not approve of the project and it was canceled. RuneQuest did not prosper with its association with Avalon Hill, and the relationship between Chaosium, who held the rights to Glorantha, and Avalon Hill, who held the rights to RuneQuest, broke down completely in 1995. Following the break with Chaosium, Avalon Hill began to assert their trademark to the RuneQuest name, began work on RuneQuest: Slayers. This was unrelated to Glorantha and the third edition rules. The project was canceled just before printing in 1998.

During this period of breakdown, Glorantha continued to evolve. The advent of the Internet caused a boom in fan creations for Glorantha. This was supported by several unofficial business ventures, such as Reaching Moon Megacorp, and a lively convention scene.  Loren Miller proposed his Maximum Game Fun principle as a basis for gaming in Glorantha; this soon became a game system in its own right. David Dunham proposed his PenDragon Pass system, a nearly freeform game system, and several ambitious freeform games were played at conventions. One such game, Home of the Bold, hosted up to eighty participants.

The video game King of Dragon Pass was released by A Sharp in 1999. The player assumes the role of an Orlanthi hero who seeks to unite the clans and tribes of Dragon Pass into a single kingdom. The game features exceptional depth of coverage of the area of Dragon Pass, and featured the first compelling public view of Stafford's ideas about the hero's quest. Stafford was also self publishing additional material at this time about the history and mythology of Glorantha in non-game form in The Glorious (Re)Ascent of Yelm.

21st century
In 2000, Issaries, Inc. published Hero Wars, a new Gloranthan role-playing game unrelated to RuneQuest. Its next iteration in 2003 was named HeroQuest and later in 2008, Moon Design Publications published an updated second edition. 2016 saw Moon Design publish HeroQuest Glorantha, completely integrating Glorantha into the rules. 2006 saw RuneQuest licensed from Issaries by Mongoose Publishing with a second edition in 2010. In 2012, The Design Mechanism published the sixth edition of RuneQuest, with no Gloranthan content. Glorantha returned in 2018 with Chaosium publishing RuneQuest - Roleplaying in Glorantha.

Hero Wars and HeroQuest
The HeroQuest game system, written by Robin Laws in collaboration with Greg Stafford, is a complete departure from RuneQuest. The former leverages quick contests and open, almost free-form style of skills and abilities to emulate a mythic structure of play, with rising and falling tensions that contrast with the more naturalistic focus taken by RuneQuest. Owing to this approach, in approach some RuneQuest fans found it difficult to adjust to HeroQuest. A rewritten second edition was published in Spring 2009 by Moon Design Publications. It was supported with comprehensive Gloranthan sourcebooks Sartar: Kingdom of Heroes (2009), Sartar Companion (2010) and Pavis: Gateway to Adventure (2012).

RuneQuest
In 2006, RuneQuest was licensed to Mongoose Publishing by Issaries. Their new edition of the rules, were not set in Glorantha, and required a further supplemement, Glorantha – The Second Age to play. Written by Robin Laws, it was set in the Second Age of Gloratha's history against the backdrop of The God Learner empire and the Empire of Wyrm's Friend. In this edition, Mongoose produced 17 supplements and adventures based in Glorantha, alongside their generic fantasy background.

A second edition Mongoose RuneQuest II was published in January 2010, but Mongoose Publishing's licence for Gloranthan material lapsed in May 2011. The RuneQuest II game system has been retitled "Legend", and contains no Gloranthan material. A new company, The Design Mechanism, was formed by the authors of RuneQuest II, and ownership of the Gloranthan supplements produced for the "RuneQuest II" line was transferred to them (PDF versions continued to be sold). There are close links between The Design Mechanism and Moon Design Publications, with The Design Mechanism founders writing material for both companies. Their new edition of the RuneQuest rules, RuneQuest: Sixth Edition, did not have a Gloranthan setting.

In 2018 Chaosium published RuneQuest - Roleplaying in Glorantha. Wholly set in Glorantha, it advanced the in-game date to 1625, and focuses once again on Dragon Pass. Along with its two slipcase companions, it provides a complete overview of this region. Again the village of Apple Lane in the homeland of Sartar is used as a starting adventure setting, but updated to the year 1625. Two further supplements concentrate on specific areas within Dragon Pass.

The World of Glorantha

The Glorantha website introduces Glorantha as follows:

Glorantha is an action-packed world of adventure. Gods and Goddesses struggle here, with nations of people nothing but their pawns. The stormy barbarians with their brutal but honest Storm God struggle against the Lunar Empire, led by the imperial Sun God and devious Moon Goddess.

Glorantha is an exciting world of heroes. Legends are being made by great individuals, many who are not even human beings. Some work with the deities, other heroes and heroines fight against them.

Glorantha is colorful and full of magic. Supernatural animals are found, ranging from unicorns to seven types of merfolk and the Goddess of Lions.

Glorantha is immense. If explored, it has different worlds and dimensions, whole realms where Gods, spirits and sorcerous powers come from.  Unlike many fantasy settings, Glorantha emphasises religion, myth and belief to a level rarely seen in role-playing or fantasy fiction elsewhere.

Glorantha shares some fantasy tropes such as dwarves, elves, trolls, giants, but has developed them differently to the more conventional versions based on the work of  Tolkien. Dwarves are literally made of stone and exist as manifest rigid inflexible laws of creation, while elves are intelligent, mobile plants. Glorantha is full of surprises.

Glorantha is as deep as you want it to be, or not. Hackers and choppers have what they want, while scholars and mythologists have a vast playground of new stories, legends and myths to enjoy.

It has various cultures analogous to Earth spread over two major landmasses and a wide archipelago. The northern continent of Genertela has a caste society of roughly Vedic type to the west, an autocratic Oriental society to the east and a classical-style Bronze Age culture in the center. The southern continent of Pamaltela is analogous to Africa.

Creatures of Glorantha
Broos are creatures of chaos. As they can fruitfully mate with anything, they have the body of a man and features of their animal parent, often deer, goats, antelope, cattle, and sheep. The animal parent normally dies when the child eats its way out of the host at full gestation. They worship Malia, the Mother of Disease, and Thed, the goddess of rape and mother of Chaos.Stafford & Richard (2012), page 97

Scorpionmen are belligerent and resemble scorpion-human centaur. They are stupid, vicious and live in violent matriarchies with a religious emphasis on devouring. They are chaotic in nature.

Ducks or Durulz are flightless humanoid duck-like creatures who have arms rather than wings (or men cursed with feathers and webbed feet). They have unknown ancestry and may descend from cursed humans or cursed ducks. They reside around rivers, mainly in Sartar, and have an unexplained mystical affinity with Death.

Aldryami or Gloranthan elves, are plant people. They worship nature and the sun and Aldrya, deity of plants, specifically. In contrast to Tolkienesque elves, they are alien, physically plant-like and unfriendly to "meat men" (humans). Like many other fantasy fictional elf races, they are excellent archers.

Mostali are machine-like dwarves. They are xenophobic, orthodox and insular. They have invented iron, which has many extraordinary magical properties in Glorantha, contrasting to the primary metal used bronze.

Uz, the trolls, are the race of darkness, large, intelligent, astoundingly omnivorous, with a very developed sonar-like sense (darksense). Their societies are matriarchal, and they worship, among others, a goddess of darkness called Kyger Litor, mother of the Trolls, and the more violent and sinister Zorak Zoran.

Dragonewts are a magical race made up of forms of neotenic dragons. They are engaged in a cycle of self-improving reincarnation. They are alien, with an incomprehensible mindset. They must have oral surgery in order to speak human languages.

Multimedia Glorantha
Glorantha has been the background for a number of different media, and numerous pieces of myth and fiction created by the Glorantha community, featured in magazines such as Tales of the Reaching Moon. Several hundred gaming miniatures by various licensees and about a dozen plush toys have also been produced at various times.

Board games
 White Bear and Red Moon/Dragon Pass
 Nomad Gods
 Khan of Khans
 Glorantha: The Gods War

Tabletop role-playing games
 RuneQuest
 HeroQuest
 13th Age Glorantha

Video games
 King of Dragon Pass by A Sharp
 Six Ages: Ride Like The Wind by A Sharp
 Six Ages 2: Lights Going Out by A Sharp

Prose fiction and comics
 King of Sartar by Greg Stafford
 The Collected/Complete Griselda by Oliver Dickinson
 Gloranthan Visions by various authors
 The Widow's Tale and Eurhol's Vale and Other Tales by Penelope Love
 Path of the Damned, a comic book series

Fanzines
 Tales of the Reaching Moon
 Hearts in Glorantha

Footnotes

References
 Astinus, 1998.  History of Role-playing:  Part III - A golden age emerges.
 Peter Maranci, 2001.  History of RuneQuest.
 author: Greg Stafford
year: 1997
url: http://www.chaosium.com/chaosium/starry-wisdom/sw1-stafford.shtml
title: Why Chaosium is
journal: Starry Wisdom #1
archive-url: https://web.archive.org/web/19990203132502/http://www.chaosium.com/chaosium/starry-wisdom/sw1-stafford.shtml
archive-date: February 3, 1999
 Greg Stafford and Jeff Richard (2012). Sartar Companion 2nd Ed. Moon Design Publications. 1: 978-0857441058

 External links
1: Glorantha
 1: https://www.chaosium.com/ - The publisher's website containing links to their Gloranthan roleplaying systems: RuneQuest, 13th Age Glorantha and QuestWorlds.
 PenDragon Pass, the rules for David Dunham's system, which puts the Gloranthan world into the Pendragon Arthurian role-playing system.

Category:Fantasy campaign settings
Category:Fantasy worlds
Category:Greg Stafford games
Category:RuneQuest""",
          "metadata": {
            "id": 12553,
            "revision_id": 1265682344,
            "timestamp": "2024-12-28T03:53:33Z"
          },
          "indexed_on": "2025-05-03T06:44:20.464826+00:00"
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "wikipedia",
        "_id": "12557",
        "_score": 1,
        "_ignored": [
          "text.keyword"
        ],
        "_source": {
          "title": "Gilles Deleuze",
          "text": """1: French philosopher (1925–1995)
1: Deleuze
2: the French botanist
3: Joseph-Philippe-François Deleuze
date: August 2019
notable_students: 1: Jean-Luc Marion
2: Claire Parnet
region: Western philosophy
era: 20th-century philosophy
image: Gilles Deleuze.webp
caption:
name: Gilles Deleuze
birth_date: 18 January 1925
birth_place: Paris, France
death_date: df: yes
1: 1995
2: 11
3: 4
4: 1925
5: 1
6: 18
death_place: Paris, France
alma_mater: University of Paris
(BA, MA, DrE)
institutions: University of Paris VIII
school_tradition: 1: * Continental philosophy
 Post-Marxism
 French Nietzscheanism
 Materialism
 Post-structuralismSimon Choat, Marx Through Post-Structuralism: Lyotard, Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze, Continuum, 2010, ch. 5.
 Empiricism
main_interests: 1: Aesthetics
2: history of Western philosophy
3: literary theory
4: metaphilosophy
5: metaphysics
6: psychoanalysis
7: semiotics
 film semiotics
notable_ideas: 1: Affect and percept
2: Arborescent
3: Assemblage
4: Body without organs
5: Desiring-production
6: Deterritorialization
7: Event
8: Haecceity
9: Identity–difference distinction
10: Immanent evaluation
11: Individuation
12: Line of flight
13: Minority
14: Molar configuration
15: Multiplicity
16: Plane of immanence
17: Reterritorialization
18: Rhizome
19: Schizoanalysis
20: Societies of control
21: Socius
22: Subjectification
23: Transcendental empiricism
24: Univocity of being
25: Virtuality
26: Movement-image
27: Time-image
title:
1: theorists
Gilles Louis René Deleuze (1: d
2: ə
3: ˈ
4: l
5: uː
6: z 1: də
2: LOOZ; 1: fr
2: ʒil dəløz
3: lang; 18 January 1925 – 4 November 1995) was a French philosopher who, from the early 1950s until his death in 1995, wrote on philosophy, literature, film, and fine art. His most popular works were the two volumes of Capitalism and Schizophrenia: Anti-Oedipus (1972) and A Thousand Plateaus (1980), both co-written with psychoanalyst Félix Guattari. His metaphysical treatise Difference and Repetition (1968) is considered by many scholars to be his magnum opus.1: "Difference and Repetition is definitely the most important work published by Deleuze." (Edouard Morot-Sir, from the back cover of the first edition of the English translation)1: James Williams: "It is nothing less than a revolution in philosophy and stands out as one of the great philosophical works of the twentieth century" (James Williams, Gilles Deleuze's Difference and Repetition: A Critical Introduction and Guide [Edinburgh UP, 2003], p. 1).

An important part of Deleuze's oeuvre is devoted to the reading of other philosophers: the Stoics, Leibniz, Hume, Kant, Nietzsche, Spinoza, and Bergson. A. W. Moore, citing Bernard Williams's criteria for a great thinker, ranks Deleuze among the "greatest philosophers".A. W. Moore,  The Evolution of Modern Metaphysics: Making Sense of Things, Cambridge University Press, 2012, p. 543: 'intellectual power and depth; a grasp of the sciences; a sense of the political, and of human destructiveness as well as creativity; a broad range and a fertile imagination; an unwillingness to settle for the superficially reassuring; and, in an unusually lucky case, the gifts of a great writer.' Although he once characterized himself as a "pure metaphysician",Beaulieu, Alain; Kazarian, Edward; Sushytska, Julia (eds.): Gilles Deleuze and Metaphysics. (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2014) his work has influenced a variety of disciplines across the humanities, including philosophy, art, and literary theory, as well as movements such as post-structuralism and postmodernism.See, for example, Steven Best and Douglas Kellner, Postmodern Theory (Guilford Press, 1991), which devotes a chapter to Deleuze and Guattari.

 Life
 Early life
Gilles Deleuze was born into a middle-class family in Paris and lived there for most of his life. His mother was Odette Camaüer and his father, Louis, was an engineer. His initial schooling was undertaken during World War II, during which time he attended the Lycée Carnot. He also spent a year in khâgne at the Lycée Henri IV. During the Nazi occupation of France, Deleuze's brother, three years his senior, Georges, was arrested for his participation in the French Resistance, and died while in transit to a concentration camp.François Dosse, Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari: Intersecting Lives, trans. Deborah Glassman (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), p. 89. In 1944, Deleuze went to study at the Sorbonne. His teachers there included several noted specialists in the history of philosophy, such as Georges Canguilhem, Jean Hyppolite, Ferdinand Alquié, and Maurice de Gandillac. Deleuze's lifelong interest in the canonical figures of modern philosophy owed much to these teachers.

 Career
Deleuze passed the agrégation in philosophy in 1948, and taught at various lycées (Amiens, Orléans, Louis le Grand) until 1957, when he took up a position at the University of Paris. In 1953, he published his first monograph, Empiricism and Subjectivity, on David Hume. This monograph was based on his 1947 DES () thesis,Alan D. Schrift (2006), Twentieth-Century French Philosophy: Key Themes and Thinkers, Blackwell Publishing, p. 117. roughly equivalent to an M.A. thesis, which was conducted under the direction of Jean Hyppolite and Georges Canguilhem.Daniela Voss, Conditions of Thought: Deleuze and Transcendental Ideas, Edinburgh University Press, 2013, p. 76. From 1960 to 1964, he held a position at the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique. During this time he published the seminal Nietzsche and Philosophy (1962) and befriended Michel Foucault. From 1964 to 1969, he was a professor at the University of Lyon. In 1968, Deleuze defended his two DrE dissertations amid the ongoing May 68 demonstrations; he later published his two dissertations under the titles Difference and Repetition (supervised by Gandillac) and Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza (supervised by Alquié).

In 1970, he was appointed to the University of Paris VIII, an experimental school organized to implement educational reform. This new university drew a number of well-known academics, including Foucault (who suggested Deleuze's hiring) and the psychoanalyst Félix Guattari. Deleuze taught at Paris VIII until his retirement in 1987.

Personal life
Deleuze's outlook on life was sympathetic to transcendental ideas, "nature as god" ethics, and the monist experience. Some of the important ideas he advocated for and found inspiration in include his personally coined expression pluralism = monism, as well as the concepts of Being and Univocity.

He married Denise Paul "Fanny" Grandjouan in 1956 and they had two children.

According to James Miller, Deleuze portrayed little visible interest in actually doing many of the risky things he so vividly conjured update: April 2021 in his lectures and writing. Married, with two children, he outwardly lived the life of a conventional French professor. He kept his fingernails untrimmed because, as he once explained, he lacked "normal protective fingerprints", and therefore could not "touch an object, particularly a piece of cloth, with the pads of my fingers without sharp pain".James Miller, The Passion of Michel Foucault, New York: Harper Collins, 1993, p. 196.

When once asked to talk about his life, he replied: "Academics' lives are seldom interesting."Negotiations, p. 137. Deleuze concludes his reply to this critic thus:

1: What do you know about me, given that I believe in secrecy? ... If I stick where I am, if I don't travel around, like anyone else I make my inner journeys that I can only measure by my emotions, and express very obliquely and circuitously in what I write. ... Arguments from one's own privileged experience are bad and reactionary arguments.Negotiations, pp. 11–12.

Death
Deleuze, who had suffered from respiratory ailments from a young age,François Dosse, Deleuze and Guattari: Intersecting Lives, trans D. Glassman, CUP 2010, p. 98. developed tuberculosis in 1968 and underwent lung removal.François Dosse, Deleuze and Guattari: Intersecting Lives, trans D. Glassman, CUP 2010, p. 178. He suffered increasingly severe respiratory symptoms for the rest of his life. In the last years of his life, simple tasks such as writing required laborious effort. Overwhelmed by his respiratory problems, he died by suicide on 4 November 1995, throwing himself from the window of his apartment.

Before his death, Deleuze had announced his intention to write a book entitled La Grandeur de Marx (The Greatness of Marx), and left behind two chapters of an unfinished project entitled Ensembles and Multiplicities (these chapters have been published as the essays "Immanence: A Life" and "The Actual and the Virtual").François Dosse, Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari: Intersecting Lives, pp. 454–455.  "Immanence: A Life" has been translated and published in Pure Immanence and Two Regimes of Madness, while "The Actual and Virtual" has been translated and published as an appendix to the second edition of Dialogues. He is buried in the cemetery of the village of Saint-Léonard-de-Noblat.

 Philosophy
Deleuze's works fall into two groups: on the one hand, monographs interpreting the work of other philosophers (Baruch Spinoza, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Friedrich Nietzsche, Henri Bergson, Michel Foucault) and artists (Marcel Proust, Franz Kafka, Francis Bacon); on the other, eclectic philosophical tomes organized by concept (e.g., difference, sense, event, economy, cinema, desire, philosophy). However, both of these aspects are seen by his critics and analysts as often overlapping, in particular, due to his prose and the unique mapping of his books that allow for multifaceted readings.

 Metaphysics
Deleuze's main philosophical project in the works he wrote prior to his collaborations with Guattari can be summarized as an inversion of the traditional metaphysical relationship between identity and difference. Traditionally, difference is seen as derivative from identity: e.g., to say that "X is different from Y" assumes some X and Y with at least relatively stable identities (as in Plato's forms). On the contrary, Deleuze claims that all identities are effects of difference. Identities are neither logically nor metaphysically prior to difference, Deleuze argues, "given that there exist differences of nature between things of the same genus.""Bergson's Conception of Difference", in Desert Islands, p. 33. That is, not only are no two things ever the same, the categories used to identify individuals in the first place derive from differences. Apparent identities such as "X" are composed of endless series of differences, where "X" = "the difference between x and x", and "x" = "the difference between...", and so forth. Difference, in other words, goes all the way down. To confront reality honestly, Deleuze argues, beings must be grasped exactly as they are, and concepts of identity (forms, categories, resemblances, unities of apperception, predicates, etc.) fail to attain what he calls "difference in itself." "If philosophy has a positive and direct relation to things, it is only insofar as philosophy claims to grasp the thing itself, according to what it is, in its difference from everything it is not, in other words, in its internal difference."Desert Islands, p. 32.

Like Kant, Deleuze considers traditional notions of space and time as unifying forms imposed by the subject. He, therefore, concludes that pure difference is non-spatiotemporal; it is an idea, what Deleuze calls "the virtual". (The coinage refers to Proust's definition of what is constant in both the past and the present: "real without being actual, ideal without being abstract.")Proust, Le Temps Retrouvé, ch. III. While Deleuze's virtual ideas superficially resemble Plato's forms and Kant's ideas of pure reason, they are not originals or models, nor do they transcend possible experience; instead they are the conditions of actual experience, the internal difference in itself. "The concept they [the conditions] form is identical to its object."Desert Islands, p. 36. A Deleuzean idea or concept of difference is therefore not a wraith-like abstraction of an experienced thing, it is a real system of differential relations that creates actual spaces, times, and sensations.See "The Method of Dramatization" in Desert Islands, and "Actual and Virtual" in Dialogues II.

Thus, Deleuze at times refers to his philosophy as a transcendental empiricism (1: fr
2: empirisme transcendantal), alluding to Kant.Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition, Continuum, 2004[1968], pp. 56 and 143.Adrian Parr (ed.), The Deleuze Dictionary (Revised Edition), Edinburgh University Press, 2010, p. 289: "Unlike Kant, Deleuze does not conceive of [...] unthought conditions as abstract or necessary philosophical entities, but as contingent tendencies beyond the reach of empirical consciousness." In Kant's transcendental idealism, experience only makes sense when organized by intuitions (namely, space and time) and concepts (such as causality). Assuming the content of these intuitions and concepts to be qualities of the world as it exists independently of human perceptual access, according to Kant, spawns seductive but senseless metaphysical beliefs (for example, extending the concept of causality beyond possible experience results in unverifiable speculation about a first cause). Deleuze inverts the Kantian arrangement: experience exceeds human concepts by presenting novelty, and this raw experience of difference actualizes an idea, unfettered by prior categories, forcing the invention of new ways of thinking (see Epistemology).

Simultaneously, Deleuze claims that being is univocal, i.e., that all of its senses are affirmed in one voice. Deleuze borrows the doctrine of ontological univocity from the medieval philosopher John Duns Scotus. In medieval disputes over the nature of God, many eminent theologians and philosophers (such as Thomas Aquinas) held that when one says that "God is good", God's goodness is only analogous to human goodness. Scotus argued to the contrary that when one says that "God is good", the goodness in question is exactly the same sort of goodness that is meant when one says "Jane is good". That is, God only differs from humans in degree, and properties such as goodness, power, reason, and so forth are univocally applied, regardless of whether one is talking about God, a person, or a flea.

Deleuze adapts the doctrine of univocity to claim that being is, univocally, difference. "With univocity, however, it is not the differences which are and must be: it is being which is Difference, in the sense that it is said of difference. Moreover, it is not we who are univocal in a Being which is not; it is we and our individuality which remains equivocal in and for a univocal Being."Difference and Repetition, p. 39. Here Deleuze at once echoes and inverts Spinoza, who maintained that everything that exists is a modification of the one substance, God or Nature. For Deleuze, there is no one substance, only an always-differentiating process, an origami cosmos, always folding, unfolding, refolding. Deleuze summarizes this ontology in the paradoxical formula "pluralism = monism".A Thousand Plateaus, p. 20.

Difference and Repetition (1968) is Deleuze's most sustained and systematic attempt to work out the details of such a metaphysics, but his other works develop similar ideas. In Nietzsche and Philosophy (1962), for example, reality is a play of forces; in Anti-Oedipus (1972), a "body without organs"; in What is Philosophy? (1991), a "plane of immanence" or "chaosmos".

 Epistemology
Deleuze's unusual metaphysics entails an equally atypical epistemology, or what he calls a transformation of "the image of thought". According to Deleuze, the traditional image of thought, found in philosophers such as Aristotle, René Descartes, and Edmund Husserl, misconceives thinking as a mostly unproblematic business. Truth may be hard to discover—it may require a life of pure theorizing, or rigorous computation, or systematic doubt—but thinking is able, at least in principle, to correctly grasp facts, forms, ideas, etc. It may be practically impossible to attain a God's-eye, neutral point of view, but that is the ideal to approximate: a disinterested pursuit that results in a determinate, fixed truth; an orderly extension of common sense. Deleuze rejects this view as papering over the metaphysical flux, instead claiming that genuine thinking is a violent confrontation with reality, an involuntary rupture of established categories. Truth changes thought; it alters what people think is possible. By setting aside the assumption that thinking has a natural ability to recognize the truth, Deleuze says, people attain a "thought without image", a thought always determined by problems rather than solving them. "All this, however, presupposes codes or axioms which do not result by chance, but which do not have an intrinsic rationality either. It's just like theology: everything about it is quite rational if you accept sin, the immaculate conception, and the incarnation. Reason is always a region carved out of the irrational—not sheltered from the irrational at all, but traversed by it and only defined by a particular kind of relationship among irrational factors. Underneath all reason lies delirium, and drift."Desert Islands, p. 262.

The Logic of Sense, published in 1969, is one of Deleuze's most peculiar works in the field of epistemology. Michel Foucault, in his essay "Theatrum Philosophicum" about the book, attributed this to how he begins with his metaphysics but approaches it through language and truth; the book is focused on "the simple condition that instead of denouncing metaphysics as the neglect of being, we force it to speak of extrabeing". In it, he refers to epistemological paradoxes: in the first series, as he analyzes Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland, he remarks that "the personal self requires God and the world in general. But when substantives and adjectives begin to dissolve, when the names of pause and rest are carried away by the verbs of pure becoming and slide into the language of events, all identity disappears from the self, the world, and God."The Logic of Sense, p. 3.

Deleuze's peculiar readings of the history of philosophy stem from this unusual epistemological perspective. To read a philosopher is no longer to aim at finding a single, correct interpretation, but is instead to present a philosopher's attempt to grapple with the problematic nature of reality. "Philosophers introduce new concepts, they explain them, but they don't tell us, not completely anyway, the problems to which those concepts are a response. [...] The history of philosophy, rather than repeating what a philosopher says, has to say what he must have taken for granted, what he didn't say but is nonetheless present in what he did say."Negotiations, p. 136.

Likewise, rather than seeing philosophy as a timeless pursuit of truth, reason, or universals, Deleuze defines philosophy as the creation of concepts. For Deleuze, concepts are not identity conditions or propositions, but metaphysical constructions that define a range of thinking, such as Plato's ideas, Descartes's cogito, or Kant's doctrine of the faculties. A philosophical concept "posits itself and its object at the same time as it is created."What Is Philosophy?, p. 22. In Deleuze's view, then, philosophy more closely resembles practical or artistic production than it does an adjunct to a definitive scientific description of a pre-existing world (as in the tradition of John Locke or Willard Van Orman Quine).

In his later work (from roughly 1981 onward), Deleuze sharply distinguishes art, philosophy, and science as three distinct disciplines, each relating to reality in different ways. While philosophy creates concepts, the arts create novel qualitative combinations of sensation and feeling (what Deleuze calls "percepts" and "affects"), and the sciences create quantitative theories based on fixed points of reference such as the speed of light or absolute zero (which Deleuze calls "functives"). According to Deleuze, none of these disciplines enjoy primacy over the others:Negotiations, p. 123. they are different ways of organizing the metaphysical flux, "separate melodic lines in constant interplay with one another."Negotiations, p. 125. For example, Deleuze does not treat cinema as an art representing an external reality, but as an ontological practice that creates different ways of organizing movement and time.Cinema 1: The Movement Image Philosophy, science, and art are equally, and essentially, creative and practical. Hence, instead of asking traditional questions of identity such as "is it true?" or "what is it?", Deleuze proposes that inquiries should be functional or practical: "what does it do?" or "how does it work?"Negotiations, p. 21: "We're strict functionalists: what we're interested in is how something works".

 Values
1: Control society
2: the broader social-scientific concept
3: Social control
In ethics and politics Deleuze again echoes Spinoza, albeit in a sharply Nietzschean key. Following his rejection of any metaphysics based on identity, Deleuze criticizes the notion of an individual as an arresting or halting of differentiation (as the etymology of the word "individual" suggests1: how so? differentiation is not not dividing
date: February 2025). Guided by the naturalistic ethics of Spinoza and Nietzsche, Deleuze instead seeks to understand individuals and their moralities as products of the organization of pre-individual desires and powers.

In the two volumes of Capitalism and Schizophrenia, Anti-Oedipus (1972) and A Thousand Plateaus (1980), Deleuze and Guattari describe history as a congealing and regimentation of "desiring-production" (a concept combining features of Freudian drives and Marxist labor) into the modern individual (typically neurotic and repressed), the nation-state (a society of continuous control), and capitalism (an anarchy domesticated into infantilizing commodification). Deleuze, following Karl Marx, welcomes capitalism's destruction of traditional social hierarchies as liberating but inveighs against its homogenization of all values to the aims of the market.

The first part of Capitalism and Schizophrenia undertakes a universal history and posits the existence of a separate socius (the social body that takes credit for production) for each mode of production: the earth for the tribe, the body of the despot for the empire, and capital for capitalism.").Daniel W. Smith, Henry Somers-Hall (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Deleuze, Cambridge University Press, 2012, p. 137.

In his 1990 essay "Postscript on the Societies of Control" ("Post-scriptum sur les sociétés de contrôle"), Deleuze builds on Foucault's notion of the society of discipline to argue that society is undergoing a shift in structure and control. Where societies of discipline were characterized by discrete physical enclosures (such as schools, factories, prisons, office buildings, etc.), institutions and technologies introduced since World War II have dissolved the boundaries between these enclosures. As a result, social coercion and discipline have moved into the lives of individuals considered as "masses, samples, data, markets, or 'banks'." The mechanisms of modern societies of control are described as continuous, following and tracking individuals throughout their existence via transaction records, mobile location tracking, and other personally identifiable information.

But how does Deleuze square his pessimistic diagnoses with his ethical naturalism? Deleuze claims that standards of value are internal or immanent: to live well is to fully express one's power, to go to the limits of one's potential, rather than to judge what exists by non-empirical, transcendent standards. Modern society still suppresses difference and alienates people from what they can do. To affirm reality, which is a flux of change and difference, established identities must be overturned and so become all that they can become—though exactly what cannot be known in advance. The pinnacle of Deleuzean practice, then, is creativity. "Herein, perhaps, lies the secret: to bring into existence and not to judge. If it is so disgusting to judge, it is not because everything is of equal value, but on the contrary, because what has value can be made or distinguished only by defying judgment. What expert judgment, in art, could ever bear on the work to come?"Essays Critical and Clinical, p. 135.

 Deleuze's interpretations
Deleuze's studies of individual philosophers and artists are purposely heterodox. Deleuze once famously described his method of interpreting philosophers as "buggery (enculage)", as sneaking behind an author and producing an offspring which is recognizably his, yet also monstrous and different.Negotiations, p. 6. See also: Daniel W. Smith, "The Inverse Side of the Structure: Zizek on Deleuze on Lacan", Criticism (2004): "Deleuze's all-too-well-known image of philosophical "buggery," which makes thinkers produce their own "monstrous" children"; Robert Sinnerbrink (in "Nomadology or Ideology? Zizek’s Critique of Deleuze", Parrhesia 1 (2006): 62–87) describes the "popular topic" of Deleuze's "notorious remarks"; Donald Callen (in "The Difficult Middle", Rhizomes 10 (Spring 2005)) describes "intellectual buggery" as "what Deleuze himself famously said about his encounters with the works of other philosophers." Deleuze's buggery analogy is also cited by, among many others, Brian Massumi, A User's Guide to Capitalism and Schizophrenia (MIT Press, 1992), p. 2; Slavoj Žižek, Organs without Bodies (Routledge, 2004), p. 48; Ian Buchanan, A Deleuzian Century? (Duke UP, 1999), p. 8; Jean-Jacques Lecercle, Deleuze and Language (Macmillan, 2002), p. 37; Gregg Lambert, The Non-Philosophy of Gilles Deleuze (Continuum, 2002), p. x; Claire Colebrook, Understanding Deleuze (Allen & Unwin, 2003), p. 73; and Charles Stivale, Gilles Deleuze: Key Concepts (McGill-Queen's, 2005), p. 3.

The various monographs thus are not attempts to present what Nietzsche or Spinoza strictly intended, but re-stagings of their ideas in different and unexpected ways. Deleuze's peculiar readings aim to enact the creativity he believes is the acme of philosophical practice.Desert Islands, p. 144. A parallel in painting Deleuze points to is Francis Bacon's Study after Velázquez—it is quite beside the point to say that Bacon "gets Velasquez wrong".Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation, pp. 46f: "[Bacon] let loose ... presences" already in Velázquez's painting. Cf. the passage cited above, from Negotiations, p. 136: "The history of philosophy, rather than repeating what a philosopher says, has to say what he must have taken for granted, what he didn't say but is nonetheless present in what he did say." Similar considerations apply, in Deleuze's view, to his own uses of mathematical and scientific terms, pace critics such as Alan Sokal: "I'm not saying that Resnais and Prigogine, or Godard and Thom, are doing the same thing. I'm pointing out, rather, that there are remarkable similarities between scientific creators of functions and cinematic creators of images. And the same goes for philosophical concepts, since there are distinct concepts of these spaces."Negotiations, pp. 124–125.

 Similarities with Heidegger
From the 1930s onward, German philosopher Martin Heidegger wrote in a series of manuscripts and books on concepts of Difference, Identity, Representation, and Event; notably among these the Beiträge zur Philosophie (Vom Ereignis) (Written 1936-38; published posthumously 1989); none of the relevant texts were translated into French by Deleuze's death in 1995, excluding any strong possibility of appropriation. However, Heidegger's early work can be traced through mathematician Albert Lautman, who drew heavily from Heidegger's Sein und Zeit and Vom Wesen des Grundes (1928), which James Bahoh describes as having "...decisive influence on the twentieth century mathematician and philosopher [...] whose theory of dialectical Ideas Deleuze appropriated and modified for his own use." The similarities between Heidegger's later, post-turn, 1930-1976 thought and Deleuze's early works in the 60s and 70s are generally described by Deleuze-scholar Daniel W. Smith in the following way: "Difference and Repetition could be read as a response to Being and Time (for Deleuze, Being is difference, and time is repetition)."Bahoh continues in saying that: "...then Beiträge could be read as Difference and Repetition's unknowing and anachronistic doppelgänger." Deleuze and Heidegger's philosophy is considered to converge on the topics of Difference and the Event. Where, for Heidegger, an evental being is constituted in part by difference as "...an essential dimension of the concept of event"; for Deleuze, being is difference, and difference "differentiates by way of events." In contrast to this, however, Jussi Backman argues that, for Heidegger, being is united only insofar as it consists of and is difference, or rather as the movement of difference, not too dissimilar to Deleuze's later claims:"...the unity and univocity of being (in the sense of being), its 'selfsameness,' paradoxically consists exclusively in difference."This mutual apprehension of a differential, Evental ontology lead both thinkers into an extended critique of the representation characteristic to Platonic, Aristotelian, and Cartesian thought; as Joe Hughes states: "Difference and Repetition is a detective novel. It tells the story of what some readers of Deleuze might consider a horrendous crime [...]: the birth of representation." Heidegger formed his critiques most decisively in the concept of the fourfold [German: das Geviert], a non-metaphysical grounding for the thing (as opposed to "object") as "ungrounded, mediated, meaningful, and shared" united in an "event of appropriation" [Ereignis]. This evental ontology continues in Identität und Differenz, where the fundamental concept expressed in Difference and Repetition, of dethroning the primacy of identity, can be seen throughout the text. Even in earlier Heideggerian texts such as Sein und Zeit, however, the critique of representation is "...cast in terms of the being of truth, or the processes of uncovering and covering (grounded in Dasein's existence) whereby beings come into and withdraw from phenomenal presence." In parallel, Deleuze's extended critique of representation (in the sense of detailing a "genealogy" of the antiquated beliefs as well) is given "...in terms of being or becoming as difference and repetition, together with genetic processes of individuation whereby beings come to exist and pass out of existence."

Time and space, for both thinkers, is also constituted in nearly identical ways. Time-space in the Beiträge and the three syntheses in Difference and Repetition both apprehend time as grounded in difference, whilst the distinction between the time-space of the world [Welt] and the time-space as the eventual production of such a time-space is mirrored by Deleuze's categorization between the temporality of what is actual and temporality of the virtual in the first and the second/third syntheses respectively.

Another parallel can be found in their utilization of so-called "generative paradoxes," or rather problems whose fundamental problematic element is constantly outside the categorical grasp fond of formal, natural, and human sciences. For Heidegger, this is the Earth in the fourfold, something which has as one of its traits the behaviour of "resisting articulation," what he characterizes as a "strife"; for Deleuze, a similar example can be spotted in the paradox of regress, or of indefinite proliferation in the Logic of Sense.

 Reception
In the 1960s, Deleuze's portrayal of Nietzsche as a metaphysician of difference rather than a reactionary mystic contributed greatly to the plausibility and popularity of "left-wing Nietzscheanism" as an intellectual stance.See, e.g., the approving reference to Deleuze's Nietzsche study in Jacques Derrida's essay "Différance", or Pierre Klossowski's monograph Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle, dedicated to Deleuze. More generally, see D. Allison (ed.), The New Nietzsche (MIT Press, 1985), and L. Ferry and A. Renaut (eds.), Why We Are Not Nietzscheans (University of Chicago Press, 1997). His books Difference and Repetition (1968) and The Logic of Sense (1969) led Michel Foucault to declare that "one day, perhaps, this century will be called Deleuzian."Foucault, "Theatrum Philosophicum", Critique 282, p. 885. (Deleuze, for his part, said Foucault's comment was "a joke meant to make people who like us laugh, and make everyone else livid."Negotiations, p. 4. However, in a later interview, Deleuze commented: "I don't know what Foucault meant, I never asked him" (Negotiations, p. 88).) In the 1970s, the Anti-Oedipus, written in a style by turns vulgar and esoteric,Sometimes in the same sentence: "one is thus traversed, broken, fucked by the socius" (Anti-Oedipus, p. 347). offering a sweeping analysis of the family, language, capitalism, and history via eclectic borrowings from primarily Marx, Freud, Lacan, and Nietzsche, but also featuring insights from dozens of other writers, was received as a theoretical embodiment of the anarchic spirit of May 1968. In 1994 and 1995, L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, an eight-hour series of interviews between Deleuze and Claire Parnet, aired on France's Arte Channel.

In the 1980s and 1990s, almost all of Deleuze's books were translated into English. Deleuze's work is frequently cited in English-speaking academia (in 2007, e.g., he was the 11th most frequently cited author in English-speaking publications in the humanities, between Freud and Kant). In the English-speaking academy, Deleuze's work is typically classified as continental philosophy.See, e.g., Simon Glendinning, The Idea of Continental Philosophy (Edinburgh University Press, 2006), p. 54.

However, some French and some Anglophone philosophers criticised Deleuze's work.

According to Pascal Engel, Deleuze's metaphilosophical approach makes it impossible to reasonably disagree with a philosophical system, and so destroys meaning, truth, and philosophy itself. Engel summarizes Deleuze's metaphilosophy thus: "When faced with a beautiful philosophical concept you should just sit back and admire it. You should not question it."Barry Smith (ed.), European Philosophy and the American Academy, p. 34.

American philosopher Stanley Rosen objects to Deleuze's interpretation of Nietzsche's eternal return.

Vincent Descombes argues that Deleuze's account of a difference that is not derived from identity (in Nietzsche and Philosophy) is incoherent.

Slavoj Žižek states that the Deleuze of Anti-Oedipus ("arguably Deleuze's worst book"),Žižek 2004, p. 21 the "political" Deleuze under the "'bad' influence" of Guattari, ends up, despite protestations to the contrary, as "the ideologist of late capitalism".Žižek 2004, pp. 32, 20, and 184.

 Allegations of idealism and negligence of material conditions
Peter Hallward argues that Deleuze's insistence that being is necessarily creative and always-differentiating entails that his philosophy can offer no insight into, and is supremely indifferent to, the material conditions of existence. Thus Hallward claims that Deleuze's thought is literally other-worldly, aiming only at a passive contemplation of the dissolution of all identity into the theophanic self-creation of nature.

Descombes argues that his analysis of history in Anti-Oedipus is 'utter idealism', criticizing reality for falling short of a non-existent ideal of schizophrenic becoming.

Žižek claims that Deleuze's ontology oscillates between materialism and idealism.Slavoj Žižek, Organs without Bodies, 2004, pp. 19–32, esp. p. 21: "Is this opposition not, yet again, that of materialism versus idealism? In Deleuze, this means The Logic of Sense versus Anti-Oedipus." See also p. 28 for "Deleuze's oscillation between the two models" of becoming.

 Relation with monism
Alain Badiou claims that Deleuze's metaphysics only apparently embraces plurality and diversity, remaining at bottom monist. Badiou further argues that, in practical matters, Deleuze's monism entails an ascetic, aristocratic fatalism akin to ancient Stoicism.

American philosopher Todd May argues that Deleuze's claim that difference is ontologically primary ultimately contradicts his embrace of immanence, i.e., his monism. However, May believes that Deleuze can discard the primacy-of-difference thesis, and accept a Wittgensteinian holism without significantly altering his practical philosophy.

It has more recently been argued by the Swedish philosopher 1: Rafael Holmberg
qid: Q131381563
short: yes that Deleuze's criticism of the history of philosophy as the metaphysical priority of identity over difference is a false distinction, and that Deleuze inadvertently reaches conclusions akin to such idealist philosophers of identity as Schelling.

 Subjectivity and individuality
Other European philosophers have criticized Deleuze's theory of subjectivity. For example, Manfred Frank claims that Deleuze's theory of individuation as a process of bottomless differentiation fails to explain the unity of consciousness.

Žižek also calls Deleuze to task for allegedly reducing the subject to "just another" substance and thereby failing to grasp the nothingness that, according to Lacan and Žižek, defines subjectivity. What remains worthwhile in Deleuze's oeuvre, Žižek finds, are precisely Deleuze's engagements with virtuality as the product of negativity.Žižek 2004, p. 68: "This brings us to the topic of the subject that, according to Lacan, emerges in the interstice of the 'minimal difference,' in the minimal gap between two signifiers. In this sense, the subject is 'a nothingness, a void, which exists.' ... This, then, is what Deleuze seems to get wrong in his reduction of the subject to (just another) substance. Far from belonging to the level of actualization, of distinct entities in the order of constituted reality, the dimension of the 'subject' designates the reemergence of the virtual within the order of actuality. 'Subject' names the unique space of the explosion of virtuality within constituted reality."

 Science wars
1: Science wars
In Fashionable Nonsense (1997), physicists Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont accuse Deleuze of abusing mathematical and scientific terms, particularly by sliding between accepted technical meanings and his own idiosyncratic use of those terms in his works. Sokal and Bricmont state that they don't object to metaphorical reasoning, including with mathematical concepts, but mathematical and scientific terms are useful only insofar as they are precise. They give examples of mathematical concepts being "abused" by taking them out of their intended meaning, rendering the idea into normal language reduces it to truism or nonsense. In their opinion, Deleuze used mathematical concepts about which the typical reader might be not knowledgeable, and thus served to display erudition rather than enlightening the reader. Sokal and Bricmont state that they only deal with the "abuse" of mathematical and scientific concepts and explicitly suspend judgment about Deleuze's wider contributions.

 Influence
date: January 2023
Other scholars in continental philosophy, feminist studies and sexuality studies have taken Deleuze's analysis of the sexual dynamics of sadism and masochism with a level of uncritical celebration following the 1989 Zone Books translation of the 1967 booklet on Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, Le froid et le cruel (Coldness and Cruelty). As sexuality historian Alison M. Moore notes, Deleuze's own value placed on difference is poorly reflected in this booklet which fails to differentiate between Masoch's own view of his desire and that imposed upon him by the pathologizing forms of psychiatric thought prevailing in the late nineteenth century which produced the concept of 'masochism' (a term Masoch himself emphatically rejected).Alison Moore, Recovering Difference in the Deleuzian Dichotomy of Masochism-without-Sadism, Angelaki volume 14, issue 3

Smith, Protevi and Voss note "Sokal and Bricmont’s 1999 intimations" underestimated Deleuze's awareness of mathematics and pointed out several "positive views of Deleuze’s use of mathematics as provocations for [...] his philosophical concepts", and that Deleuze's epistemology and ontology can be "brought together" with dynamical systems theory, chaos theory, biology, and geography.

Bibliography
Single-authored
 Original French English TranslationEmpirisme et subjectivité (1953)Empiricism and Subjectivity (1991)Nietzsche et la philosophie (1962)Nietzsche and Philosophy (1983)La philosophie critique de Kant (1963)Kant's Critical Philosophy (1983)Proust et les signes
(1964, 3rd exp. ed. 1976)Proust and Signs
(1973, 2nd exp. ed. 2000)Nietzsche (1965)Pure Immanence (2001)Le Bergsonisme (1966)Bergsonism (1988)Présentation de Sacher-Masoch (1967)Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty (1989)Différence et répétition (1968)Difference and Repetition (1994)Spinoza et le problème de l'expression
(Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1968 & 1985)Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza (1990)Logique du sens (1969)The Logic of Sense (1990)Dialogues
(1977, 2nd exp. ed. 1996, with Claire Parnet)Dialogues II
(1987, 2nd exp. ed. 2002)One Less Manifesto (1978) In Superpositions (with Carmelo Bene)Spinoza – Philosophie pratique, 2nd ed.
(Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1981)Spinoza: Practical Philosophy (1988)Francis Bacon – Logique de la sensation (1981)Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation (2003)Cinéma I: L'image-mouvement (1983)Cinema 1: The Movement-Image (1986)Cinéma II: L'image-temps (1985)Cinema 2: The Time-Image (1989)Foucault (1986)Foucault (1988)Le pli – Leibniz et le baroque (1988)The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque (1993)Périclès et Verdi: La philosophie de Francois Châtelet (1988) In Dialogues II, revised ed. (2007)Pourparlers (1990)Negotiations (1995).Critique et clinique (1993)Essays Critical and Clinical (1997)L'île déserte et autres textes (2002)Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953–1974 (2003)Deux régimes de fous et autres textes (2004)Two Regimes of Madness: Texts and Interviews 1975–1995 (2006)

In collaboration with Félix Guattari
 Capitalisme et Schizophrénie 1. L'Anti-Œdipe (1972). Trans. Anti-Oedipus (1977).
 On the Line, New York: Semiotext(e), translated by John Johnson (1983).
 Kafka: Pour une Littérature Mineure (1975). Trans. Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature (1986).
 Rhizome (1976). Trans., in revised form, in A Thousand Plateaus (1987).
 Nomadology: The War Machine (1986). Trans. in A Thousand Plateaus (1987).
 Capitalisme et Schizophrénie 2. Mille Plateaux (1980). Trans. A Thousand Plateaus (1987).
 Qu'est-ce que la philosophie? (1991). Trans. What is Philosophy? (1994).
 Part I: Deleuze and Guattari on Anti-Oedipus of Chaosophy: Texts and Interviews 1972–77 (2009) Edited by Sylvere Lotringer. (pp. 35–118).

In collaboration with Michel Foucault
 "Intellectuals and Power: A Discussion Between Gilles Deleuze and Michel Foucault". Telos 16 (Summer 1973). New York: Telos Press (reprinted in L'île déserte et autres textes / Desert Islands and Other Texts; see above)

 Documentaries
 L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze, with Claire Parnet, produced by Pierre-André Boutang. Éditions Montparnasse.

 See also
colwidth: 50em
1: * Deleuze and Guattari
 Gilbert Simondon's theory of individuation
 Kantian empiricism
 Problem of future contingents
 Speculative realism
 Transcendental nominalism

 Notes
1: 30em
References
1: 30em
group: note

 External links

 Webdeleuze – Courses & audio 1: fr
2: en
3: it
4: es
5: pt, etc.
 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Gilles Deleuze", by Daniel Smith & John Protevi.
 Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Gilles Deleuze", by Jon Roffe.
 Near complete bibliography including various translations
 Alain Badiou, "The Event in Deleuze." (English translation).
 Lectures and notes on work by Deleuze and Guattari.
 Rhizomes. Online journal inspired by Deleuzian thought.
 Web resources from Wayne State University.
 Capitalism: A Very Special Delirium (1995).
 Institute of Art and Ideas: "Deleuze and the Time for Non-Reason", by James R. Williams.

list:


Category:1925 births
Category:1995 suicides
Category:1995 deaths
Category:20th-century atheists
Category:20th-century French historians
Category:20th-century French non-fiction writers
Category:20th-century French philosophers
Category:Anti-psychiatry
Category:Atheist philosophers
Category:Deaths by defenestration
Category:Empiricists
Category:French epistemologists
Category:Film theorists
Category:Foucault scholars
Category:Franz Kafka scholars
Category:French anti-capitalists
Category:French anti-fascists
Category:French atheists
Category:French essayists
Category:French ethicists
Category:French historians of philosophy
Category:French male non-fiction writers
Category:French political philosophers
Category:Hegel scholars
Category:Hume scholars
Category:Kant scholars
Category:Literacy and society theorists
Category:Literary theorists
Category:Lycée Carnot alumni
Category:Lycée Henri-IV alumni
Category:Mass media theorists
Category:Materialists
Category:Metaphilosophers
Category:Nietzsche scholars
Category:Ontologists
Category:French philosophers of art
Category:French philosophers of culture
Category:Philosophers of economics
Category:French philosophers of education
Category:French philosophers of history
Category:Philosophers of literature
Category:Philosophers of love
Category:French philosophers of mind
Category:Philosophers of psychology
Category:French philosophers of science
Category:Philosophers of sexuality
Category:French philosophy writers
Category:Poststructuralists
Category:Scholars of Marxism
Category:Spinoza scholars
Category:Suicides by jumping in France
Category:Suicides in Paris
Category:University of Paris alumni
Category:Academic staff of the University of Paris
Category:Academic staff of Paris 8 University Vincennes-Saint-Denis
Category:Writers from Paris""",
          "metadata": {
            "id": 12557,
            "revision_id": 1283083379,
            "timestamp": "2025-03-30T10:15:14Z"
          },
          "indexed_on": "2025-05-03T06:44:20.472942+00:00"
        }
      }